---
title: Farewell, elementary
updated: 2022-03-14

hidden: true
---

_Right off the bat, I didn't want to write this blog post; Dani had suggested we write a public post on the elementary blog sharing some light details and wishing each other well, but she then publicly shared an extremely distorted version of the situation on Twitter. As a result, I feel the need to correct the record, and then importantly: **move on.**_

---

Over the last decade, I've worked to help build [elementary](https://elementary.io) into what it is today: a world-class operating system lead by a team who is involved in and oftentimes driving the direction of the greater open source desktop space. In 2011 I founded elementary, LLC. so we could have a legal entity under which to do business, sign agreements, etc. I owned and ran the company for seven years, bearing the entirety of the legal responsibility and handling much of the administration and logistics. At the time of its founding, Dani and I both had jobs elsewhere and worked on building elementary as much as we could.

In 2014, [I joined System76 full-time](/blog/life-changes/) while continuing to work on elementary. In 2015 we made the decision to [hire Dani on full time](https://web.archive.org/web/20180523170750/https://plus.google.com/+DanielFor%C3%A9/posts/NR6X8jQGX59). In 2018, we [restructured the company side of elementary into elementary, Inc.](https://github.com/elementary/website/commit/276102f081c096be50e2794c245b3612715bf8a3) with Dani and I as equal co-owners, and then [in August of 2018 I left System76 to join elementary full time](/blog/a-new-chapter/) as well.

Each release since I joined elementary full time performed even better sales-wise than the last, until OS 6 and 6.1 which performed far worse than expected, likely in part due to the ongoing global pandemic—people were seemingly less likely to pay an optional amount to download an operating system when they could just get it for free. It became clear we needed to re-prioritize our company finances; in my view, we needed to invest directly into contracts or hiring for specific projects to bring in increased revenue while staying firm in our open source, privacy-centric, and ethical funding beliefs.

Something that came up repeatedly between me and our CFO was also the possibility of one or both of me and Dani again taking a full-time position at another company to enable us to hire or contract for those projects; we would stay involved with day-to-day operations and guidance of the company much like we had done in the past, but with a day job elsewhere to free up some resources. Dani instead pushed for making cuts to our salaries and healthcare, and wanted to hire for other positions like a developer advocate or marketing.

We had a big business development meeting in December, 2021 to go over projects, prioritize finances, and discuss the budget. During that week, Dani, our CFO, and I again discussed the possibility of taking jobs elsewhere while continuing to work on elementary. In January, we enacted some adjustments including cutting salaries and completely eliminating healthcare for employees and family members. I was reluctant to agree to these cuts, but agreed since it seemed like the only immediate solution, as increasing revenue would take longer. We agreed to revisit the situation quarterly—likely with additional salary cuts—with the next time set for April.

Since discussing the possibility of taking a salary elsewhere, I had been keeping a casual ear to the ground for potential positions, but nothing really stood out. However, soon after our meeting and these cuts, a perfect opportunity in open source and with existing friends and colleagues was shared with me—so I looked into it.

After confirming it would be an incredible fit while importantly allowing me to continue my work on elementary, I made the hard decision to cut back my hours at elementary, eliminate my salary (freeing it up for other initiatives), and to take this position for my wage—at the same time, it was _abundantly_ clear that I would remain involved in a capacity similar to that of when we started elementary. Dani and I agreed to this verbally on the phone, and all seemed well.

Unfortunately, I found out that Dani immediately called our CFO and discussed how to force me out of the company. I later learned this was not the first time Dani had discussed the possibility of forcing me out, which was a bit of a shock to me. In a follow-up discussion, Dani claimed for the first time that she was disappointed with my “performance” over the last several months and that she no longer wanted to work with me in any capacity. She told me I needed to resign immediately, that I needed to take some time away from the elementary community I had helped build over the last decade, and that she would not discuss any sort of a transition of my projects or responsibilities until I signed a legal agreement to resign from the company.

This was all a shock.

We set up a phone call to discuss further and she opened by saying she was angry but didn't want to just yell at me—then proceeded to effectively yell at me for seven minutes straight. I tried to steer the conversation towards discussing some sort of transition plan and she immediately shut it down, telling me this was not a discussion and again repeating her desire for me to immediately resign. I suggested we take a break, cool off, and resume the conversation asynchronously which she agreed to.

Luckily everything from this point forward is recorded in text form. There was a bit of back and forth, Dani saying I need to resign, me reiterating that wasn't my intention without having a plan in place—and that I didn't think that was the best plan for the company itself or our partners and contributors without having a transition plan. We seemed to get to a standstill here, and Dani stopped working on elementary projects without any contact for about two weeks. In the meantime, I tried to continue working on elementary but it was difficult as much of my work required her sign-off. Still, I continued making good progress and reporting it daily.

Dani eventually replied that she was discussing her legal options with her lawyer. She also raised the possibility of her resigning from the company. At this point, I didn't know what to expect so I retained a lawyer as well to protect myself and to aid in any negotiations. Dani told me she would negotiate and offered me half of the company’s cash on hand to buy my 50% of the shares; I told her I didn't believe that was a fair valuation of the company, but that I understood it would be a big expense, and ultimately I would need to run the offer by a lawyer and get their opinion. She responded that there was no room for negotiation and that was her final offer. Hardly an amicable discussion.

At this point, I want to be clear: it's not about the money; I never even intended for a buy-out to be on the table. As I had repeatedly expressed, the plan was a return to how we ran things when I was working full-time elsewhere, with me still being very involved in the company and its success as an equal owner. However, Dani continued to push for buying my shares for 50% of the company's cash on hand as her only offer. I discussed it with my lawyer and they expressed doubts about the valuation, especially when there is a strong brand identity, hundreds of thousands of users, and a reputation of design leadership in our industry. But if Dani was adamant about this being the only possible route, I decided it was probably best for me to give up my decade-plus of involvement in elementary if it meant it could continue on successfully.

Dani said she would send me a formal offer "ASAP," but that she wouldn't pay to have it drafted without me agreeing to it first. I told her I _intended_ to accept an offer but would of course need to have it reviewed by a lawyer before I would agree to or sign anything. She didn't send any communication—about this or other work—for the next five days, so I had my lawyer send what we had discussed as a possible offer which included me retaining a minuscule percentage of ownership while selling the rest to Dani; this would give her complete control over the company while also protecting myself from completely missing out in case she were to sell the company e.g. to an investor or other party. My lawyer also expressed that we include a promissory note (basically an agreement to pay an additional sum out over a long period of time) to help reflect the intangibles that add value to the company, so we did—but this was easily the most negotiable part of the offer (and what I cared about the least).

Dani replied that this was not acceptable and that she didn't agree to it, and yet still refused to send a formal offer or counteroffer. She repeatedly called it a negotiation, but then said there was absolutely no room to negotiate. She again ceased all elementary-related work for a week while I tried to continue to run things. After a bit more back and forth and while I was still trying to negotiate something amicable, she reiterated that she would not agree to any arrangement where I kept any ownership in the company, and that she would instead want to be bought out of her shares if I wanted to keep any ownership. She then publicly shared her version of the story on social media, including private company financials (which has since been picked up by the usual suspects in open source punditry) and actually _lowered_ her informal offer. She also offered to be bought out of her shares for an even lower sum.

Again, I am honestly not concerned about the money, but I do want to make sure any legal agreement I am being told to sign is reviewed by a lawyer representing me, and reflects an amicable deal. I don't think my efforts to negotiate were unreasonable, even if they took longer than I would have liked.

In the end, I have decided that the best course of action is for me to move on; I'm giving up on my decade-plus passion for elementary, and accepting an offer for Dani to be the sole, 100% owner of elementary, Inc. She now owns the entirety of the company shares and responsibility, and I wish her the best in continuing its legacy.

In line with Dani's wishes, I will no longer be involved in any way at elementary. Instead, I will focus my free-time efforts on contributing to GNOME, Flatpak, Flathub, and those growing ecosystems. In many ways, this will be a continuation of my work from elementary where I was involved in GNOME hackfests and conferences, attended and spoke at the Linux App Summit, helped design and championed the cross-desktop dark style and accent colors, and worked on an open ecosystem of apps. Soon, I will also be joining an open source organization where I will continue to work with many familiar faces in the free desktop world while improving the lives of folks around the world—and I can't wait to get started. But more on that later.
